
## Networking and TLS Configuration

This chart provides support for Ingress resources. If you have an ingress controller installed on your cluster, such as [nginx-ingress-controller](https://kubernetes.github.io/ingress-nginx/) or [contour](https://projectcontour.io/) you can utilize the ingress controller to serve your application. To enable Ingress integration, set `ingress.enabled` to `true`.

The most common scenario is to have one host name mapped to the deployment. In this case, the `ingress.hostname` property can be used to set the host name. The `ingress.tls` parameter can be used to add the TLS configuration for this host.

However, it is also possible to have more than one host. To facilitate this, the `ingress.extraHosts` parameter (if available) can be set with the host names specified as an array. The `ingress.extraTLS` parameter (if available) can also be used to add the TLS configuration for extra hosts.

> NOTE: For each host specified in the `ingress.extraHosts` parameter, it is necessary to set a name, path, and any annotations that the Ingress controller should know about. Not all annotations are supported by all Ingress controllers, but [this annotation reference document](https://github.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/blob/master/docs/user-guide/nginx-configuration/annotations.md) lists the annotations supported by many popular Ingress controllers.

Adding the TLS parameter (where available) will cause the chart to generate HTTPS URLs, and the application will be available on port 443. The actual TLS secrets do not have to be generated by this chart. However, if TLS is enabled, the Ingress record will not work until the TLS secret exists.

[Learn more about Ingress controllers](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress-controllers/).

#### Configure TLS Secrets for use with Ingress

This chart facilitates the creation of TLS secrets for use with the Ingress controller (although this is not mandatory). There are several common use cases:

- Generate certificate secrets based on chart parameters.
- Enable externally generated certificates.
- Manage application certificates via an external service (like [cert-manager](https://github.com/jetstack/cert-manager/)).
- Create self-signed certificates within the chart (if supported).

In the first two cases, a certificate and a key are needed. Files are expected in `.pem` format.

Here is an example of a certificate file:

> NOTE: There may be more than one certificate if there is a certificate chain.

```text
-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----
MIID6TCCAtGgAwIBAgIJAIaCwivkeB5EMA0GCSqGSIb3DQEBCwUAMFYxCzAJBgNV
...
jScrvkiBO65F46KioCL9h5tDvomdU1aqpI/CBzhvZn1c0ZTf87tGQR8NK7v7
-----END CERTIFICATE-----
```

Here is an example of a certificate key:

```text
-----BEGIN RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
MIIEogIBAAKCAQEAvLYcyu8f3skuRyUgeeNpeDvYBCDcgq+LsWap6zbX5f8oLqp4
...
wrj2wDbCDCFmfqnSJ+dKI3vFLlEz44sAV8jX/kd4Y6ZTQhlLbYc=
-----END RSA PRIVATE KEY-----
```

- If using Helm to manage the certificates based on the parameters, copy these values into the `certificate` and `key` values for a given `*.ingress.secrets` entry.
- If managing TLS secrets separately, it is necessary to create a TLS secret with name `INGRESS_HOSTNAME-tls` (where INGRESS_HOSTNAME is a placeholder to be replaced with the hostname you set using the `*.ingress.hostname` parameter).
- If your cluster has a [cert-manager](https://github.com/jetstack/cert-manager) add-on to automate the management and issuance of TLS certificates, see the [Certificate Management with cert-manager](#certificate-management-with-cert-manager) section.
- If using self-signed certificates created by Helm, set both `*.ingress.tls` and `*.ingress.selfSigned` to `true`.

### Exposing Keycloak

This chart provides two ways to expose the Keycloak service: using a standard **Ingress** resource or the newer **Gateway API** (`HTTPRoute`).

#### 1. Using Ingress (Standard)

To enable Ingress, set `ingress.enabled=true` and provide a `hostname`:

```yaml
ingress:
  enabled: true
  hostname: keycloak.example.com
  tls: true # Requires a secret named keycloak.example.com-tls
```

#### 2. Using Gateway API (Advanced)

The [Gateway API](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/) is the successor to Ingress. It uses the `HTTPRoute` resource to route traffic from a `Gateway` to the Keycloak service.

To enable it, set `gateway.enabled=true`:

```yaml
gateway:
  enabled: true
  hostname: keycloak.example.com
  gatewayRefs:
    - name: my-gateway
      namespace: gateway-namespace
```

**TLS Configuration for Gateway API:**

When using Gateway API, TLS termination is typically handled at the `Gateway` level. The `HTTPRoute` needs to bind to a specific `listener` on the Gateway using a `sectionName`.

```yaml
gateway:
  enabled: true
  hostname: keycloak.example.com
  gatewayRefs:
    - name: my-gateway
      namespace: gateway-namespace
  tls:
    enabled: true
    sectionName: https # Must match the 'name' of the HTTPS listener in your Gateway resource
```

### Certificate Management with cert-manager

This chart supports [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/) for automating the management and issuance of TLS certificates. You can use it to secure both the internal traffic (between pods) and the external traffic (Ingress).

#### 1. Internal TLS for Keycloak Pods

You can use cert-manager to generate the TLS certificates used by the Keycloak pods themselves. This is useful if you want to enable end-to-end TLS within your cluster.

To enable this, set the `tls.autoGenerated.engine` to `cert-manager` and provide the name of an existing `Issuer` or `ClusterIssuer`:

```yaml
tls:
  enabled: true
  usePemCerts: true # Required for cert-manager generated certificates
  autoGenerated:
    enabled: true
    engine: cert-manager
    certManager:
      existingIssuer: "my-ca-issuer"
      existingIssuerKind: "Issuer" # or "ClusterIssuer"
      duration: 2160h
      renewBefore: 360h
```

The chart will create a `Certificate` resource that cert-manager will use to generate a TLS secret.

#### 2. TLS for Ingress

To use cert-manager for your Ingress, you simply need to add the [supported annotations](https://cert-manager.io/docs/usage/ingress/#supported-annotations) to the `ingress.annotations` section:

```yaml
ingress:
  enabled: true
  hostname: keycloak.example.com
  annotations:
    cert-manager.io/cluster-issuer: "letsencrypt-prod"
  tls: true
```

Cert-manager will automatically detect the Ingress resource, create a `Certificate`, and manage the secret named `keycloak.example.com-tls` (based on the hostname).

#### 3. TLS for Gateway API

When using the Gateway API, TLS is typically configured at the `Gateway` level, not the `HTTPRoute`. You should follow the [cert-manager documentation for Gateway API](https://cert-manager.io/docs/usage/gateway/) to configure your `Gateway` resource.

The `HTTPRoute` created by this chart will bind to the HTTPS listener on your Gateway via the `gateway.tls.sectionName` parameter.

### Securing traffic using TLS

TLS support for the web interface can be enabled in the chart by specifying the `tls.enabled=true`. Two possible options are available:

- Provide your own secret with the PEM or JKS certificates
- Have the chart auto-generate the certificates.
